Add I/O Standards Page (#24962)
apache/beam: website/www/site/content/en/documentation/io/io-standards.md

You may obtain a copy of the License at

http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
limitations under the License.
-->
# I/O Standards

## Overview

This Apache Beam I/O Standards document lays out the prescriptive guidance for 1P/3P developers developing an Apache Beam I/O connector. These guidelines aim to create best practices encompassing documentation, development and testing in a simple and concise manner.

### What are built-in I/O Connectors?

An I/O connector (I/O) living in the Apache Beam Github repository is known as a **Built-in I/O connector**. Built-in I/O’s have their [integration tests](#integration-tests) and performance tests routinely run by the Google Cloud Dataflow Team using the Dataflow Runner and metrics published publicly for [reference](#dashboard). Otherwise, the following guidelines will apply to both unless explicitly stated.

# Guidance

## Documentation

> This section lays out the superset of all documentation that is expected to be made available with an I/O. The Apache Beam documentation referenced throughout this section can be found [here](https://beam.apache.org/documentation/). And generally a good example to follow would be the built-in I/O, [Snowflake I/O](https://beam.apache.org/documentation/io/built-in/snowflake/).

Reviewer: nit: Internal links should be relative. Drop https://beam.apache.org

   </tr>
   <tr>
      <td>
         <p>Add a new page under <strong>I/O connector guides</strong> that covers specific tips and configurations. The following shows those for <a href="https://beam.apache.org/documentation/io/built-in/parquet/">Parquet</a>, <a href="https://beam.apache.org/documentation/io/built-in/hadoop/">Hadoop</a> and others.
         <p>Examples:
         <p><img src="/images/io-standards/io-connector-guides-screenshot.png" width="" alt="I/O connector guides screenshot" title="I/O connector guides screenshot"></img>
      </td>
   </tr>
   <tr>
      <td>
         <p>Formatting of the section headers in your Javadoc/Pythondoc should be consistent throughout such that programmatic information extraction for other pages can be enabled in the future.
         <p>Example <strong>subset</strong> of sections to include in your page in order:
         <ol>
            <li>Before you start
            <li>{Connector}IO basics
            <li>Supported Features
               <ol>
                  <li>Relational
                  </li>
               </ol>
            <li>Authentication
            <li>Reading from {Connector}
            <li>Writing to {Connector}

>             <li><a href="#unit-tests">Resource scalability</a>

Reviewer: This link is odd. Why does `Resource scalability` link to `#unit-tests`? Should the rest be links too?

            <li>Limitations
            <li>Reporting an Issue
            </li>
         </ol>
         <p>Example:
         <p>The KafkaIO <a href="https://beam.apache.org/releases/javadoc/current/org/apache/beam/sdk/io/kafka/KafkaIO.html">JavaDoc</a>
      </td>
   </tr>
   <tr>
      <td>
         <p>I/O Connectors should include a note indicating <a href="https://2022.beamsummit.org/sessions/relational-beam/">Relational Features</a> supported in their page under <strong>I/O connector guides</strong>.
         <p>Relational Features are concepts that can help improve efficiency and can optionally be implemented by an I/O Connector. Using end user supplied pipeline configuration (<a href="https://beam.apache.org/releases/javadoc/current/org/apache/beam/sdk/schemas/io/SchemaIO.html">SchemaIO</a>) and user query (<a href="https://beam.apache.org/releases/javadoc/current/org/apache/beam/sdk/schemas/FieldAccessDescriptor.html">FieldAccessDescriptor</a>) data, relational theory is applied to derive improvements such as faster pipeline execution, lower operation costs and less data read/written.
         <p>Example table:

>          <p><img src="/images/io-standards/io-supported-relational-features-table.png" width="" alt="Supported Relational Features" title="Supported Relational Features"></img>

Reviewer: Please make this text and not a table. Markdown tables might be a good choice, if not HTML tables work too.

Reviewer 2: 👍  for text instead of the image. Unfortunately markdown isn't going to work inside of html formatted stuff as far as I know.

Author: Sure, how about I have sample markdown, comment blocks which the I/O writer can simple copy and fill out and add?

         <p>Example:
         <p>BigQuery batch loads first create a temp GCS location
         <p><a href="https://github.com/apache/beam/blob/master/sdks/java/io/google-cloud-platform/src/main/java/org/apache/beam/sdk/io/gcp/bigquery/BigQueryIO.java#L455">https://github.com/apache/beam/blob/master/sdks/java/io/google-cloud-platform/src/main/java/org/apache/beam/sdk/io/gcp/bigquery/BigQueryIO.java#L455</a>
      </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
      <td>
         <p>Provide, under an <strong>Authentication</strong> subheader, how to acquire partner authorization material to securely access the source/sink.
         <p>Example:
         <p><a href="https://beam.apache.org/documentation/io/built-in/snowflake/#authentication">https://beam.apache.org/documentation/io/built-in/snowflake/#authentication</a>
         <p>Here BigQuery names it permissions but the topic covers similarities
         <p><a href="https://beam.apache.org/releases/javadoc/2.1.0/org/apache/beam/sdk/io/gcp/bigquery/BigQueryIO.html">https://beam.apache.org/releases/javadoc/2.1.0/org/apache/beam/sdk/io/gcp/bigquery/BigQueryIO.html</a>
      </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
      <td>

>          <p>I/Os should provide links to the Source/Sink documentation within <strong>Before you start Header</strong>

Author: moved

         <p>Example:
         <p>Kinesis I/O has a native implementation of java and X-language support for python but no support for Golang.
      </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td>
      <p>Indicate known limitations under a <strong>Limitations</strong> header. If the limitation has a tracking issue, please link it inline.
      <p>Example:
      <p><a href="https://beam.apache.org/documentation/io/built-in/snowflake/#limitations">https://beam.apache.org/documentation/io/built-in/snowflake/#limitations</a>
   </td>
  </tr>
</table>
</div>

### I/O (not built-in)

Custom I/Os are not included in the Apache Beam Github repository. Some examples would be [Solace](https://github.com/SolaceProducts/solace-apache-beam)IO.

<div class="table-container-wrapper">
<table class="table table-bordered table-connectors">
   <tr>
      <td>
         <p>Update I/O connectors with your I/O information
         <p>Example:
         <p><a href="https://beam.apache.org/documentation/io/connectors/#other-io-connectors-for-apache-beam">https://beam.apache.org/documentation/io/built-in/snowflake/#limitations</a>
      </td>
   </tr>
</table>
</div>

## Development

> This section outlines API Syntax, Semantics and Feature Adoption recommendations for new and existing Apache Beam I/O Connectors.

Author: changed.

> Development guidelines are written with the following principles in mind:

Author: changed

> * Consistency makes an API easier to learn

Author: added.

>     * If there are multiple ways of doing something, we should strive to be consistent first

Author: added.

> * With a couple minutes of studying documentation, users should be able to pick up most I/O connectors

Author: added.

* The design of a new I/O should consider the possibility of evolution

> * Transforms should integrate well with other Beam utilities

Author: added.

### All SDKs

#### Pipeline Configuration / Execution / Streaming / Windowing semantics guidelines

<div class="table-container-wrapper">
<table class="table table-bordered table-io-standards">
   <tr>
      <th>
         <p>Topic
      </th>
      <th>
         <p>Semantics
      </th>
   </tr>
   <tr>
      <td>
         <p>Pipeline Options
      </td>
      <td>
         <p>An I/O should rarely rely on a PipelineOptions subclass to tune internal parameters.

>          <p>A connector-related pipeline options class should:

Author: changed.

         <ul>
            <li>Document clearly, for each option, the effect it has and why one may modify it.
            <li>Option names must be namespaced to avoid collisions

>             <li>Class Name: {Connector}Options

Author: added.

>             <li>Method names: .set{Connector}{Option}, get{Connector}{Option}

Author: added.

            </li>
      </td>
   </tr>
   <tr>
      <td>
         <p>Source Windowing
      </td>
      <td>
         <p>A source must return elements in the GlobalWindow unless explicitly parameterized in the API by the user.
         <p>Allowable Non-global-window patterns:
         <ul>
            <li>ReadFromIO(window_by=...)
            <li>ReadFromIO.IntoFixedWindows(...)
            <li>ReadFromIO(apply_windowing=True/False) (e.g. <a href="https://beam.apache.org/releases/pydoc/current/apache_beam.transforms.periodicsequence.html#apache_beam.transforms.periodicsequence.PeriodicImpulse">PeriodicImpulse</a>)
            <li>IO.read().withWindowing(...)
            <li>IO.read().windowBy(...)
            <li>IO.read().withFixedWindows(...)
            </li>
         </ul>
      </td>
   </tr>
   <tr>
      <td>
         <p>Sink Windowing
      </td>
      <td>

>          <p>A sink should be Window agnostic and handle elements sent with any Windowing methodexpect elements to be sent to it in the Global Window, unless explicitly parameterized or expressed in its API.

Author: changed.

>          <p>A sink may change the windowing of a PCollection internally however it needs, however, the metadata that it returns as part of its Result object must be:

Author: changed.

         <ul>

>             <li>In the same window, unless explicitly declared in the API

Reviewer 2: A bit unclear, `same` could also refer to the internal window...
```suggestion
            <li>must be in the same window as the input, unless explicitly declared otherwise in the API.
```

Author: changed.

>             <li>With accurate timestamps

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
            <li>must have accurate timestamps.
```

>             <li><strong>It may</strong> also return metadata with information about windowing (e.g. a BigQuery job may have a timestamp, but also a window associated with it).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
            <li>may contain additional information about windowing (e.g. a BigQuery job may have a timestamp, but also a window associated with it).
```
or even `about internal windowing` for clarity?

Author: changed.

<table class="table table-bordered table-io-standards">
   <tr>
      <td>
         <p>The primary class used in working with the connector should be named <strong>{connector}IO</strong>
         <p>Example:
         <p>The BigQuery I/O is <strong>org.apache.beam.sdk.io.bigquery.BigQueryIO</strong>
      </td>
   </tr>
   <tr>
      <td>
         <p>The class should be placed in the package <strong>org.apache.beam.sdk.io.{connector}</strong>
         <p>Example:
         <p>The BigQueryIO belongs in the java package <a href="https://github.com/apache/beam/blob/master/sdks/java/io/google-cloud-platform/src/main/java/org/apache/beam/sdk/io/gcp/bigquery/BigQueryIO.java">org.apache.beam.sdk.io.bigquery</a>
      </td>
   </tr>
   <tr>
      <td>
         <p>The unit/integration/performance tests should live under the package <strong>org.apache.beam.sdk.io.{connector}.testing</strong>. This will cause the various tests to work with the standard user-facing interfaces of the connector.
         <p>Unit tests should reside in the same package (i.e. <strong>org.apache.beam.sdk.io.{connector}</strong>), as they may often test internals of the connector.

>          <p>The BigQueryIO belongs in the java package <a href="https://github.com/apache/beam/blob/master/sdks/java/io/google-cloud-platform/src/main/java/org/apache/beam/sdk/io/gcp/bigquery/BigQueryIO.java">org.apache.beam.sdk.io.bigquery</a>

Author: removed extra.

      </td>
   </tr>
   <tr>
      <td>
         <p>An I/O transform should avoid receiving user lambdas to map elements from a user type to a connector-specific type. Instead, they should interface with a connector-specific data type (with schema information when possible).

>          <p>When necessary, then an I/O transform should receive a type parameter that specifies the input type (for sinks) or output type (for sources) of the transform.

Author: removed the then

      </td>
   </tr>
   <tr>
      <td>
         <p>As part of the API of an I/O, it is highly discouraged to directly expose third-party libraries in the public API of a Beam API or connector.
         <ul>
            <li>It reduces Apache Beam’s compatibility guarantees - Changes to third-party libraries can/will directly break existing user’s pipelines.
            <li>It makes code maintainability hard - If libraries are directly exposed at API level, a dependency change will require multiple changes throughout the I/O implementation code
            <li>It forces third-party dependencies onto end users
            </li>
         </ul>
         <p>Instead, we highly recommend exposing Beam-native interfaces and an adaptor be implemented to translate.
         <p>If you believe that the library in question is extremely static in nature. Please note it in the I/O itself.

>          <p>As part of the API of an I/O, it is <strong>highly discouraged</strong> to expose third-party libraries in the public API of a Beam API or connector,. Instead, a Beam-native interface should be used and adapted into the third-library object.

Reviewer: This repeats the same thing again.

Author: Good catch, I rewrote this and forgot to remove the old!

         <p>The reasonings are because:
         <ul>
            <li>Third-party libraries will make dependency upgrades difficult, because of Beam’s backwards compatibility guarantees
            <li>Exposing third-party libraries may force dependencies onto Beam users
            </li>
         </ul>
         <p>This requirement has the shortcoming that Beam will simply mirror external library API objects, but it will allow us to upgrade external libraries if needed, and let users deal with versions as well.
      </td>
   </tr>
   <tr>
      <td>
         <p>Source and Sinks should be abstracted with a PTransform wrapper, and internal classes be declared protected or private. By doing so implementation details can be added/changed/modified without breaking implementation by dependencies.
      </td>
   </tr>
</table>
</div>

#### Classes / Methods / Properties

<div class="table-container-wrapper">
<table class="table table-bordered table-io-standards">
   <tr>
      <th>
         <p>Java Syntax
      </th>
      <th>
         <p>Semantics
      </th>
   </tr>
   <tr>
      <td>
         <p>class IO.Read
      </td>
      <td>

>          <p>Gives access to the class that represents reads within the I/O. The Read class should implement an  fluent interface similar to the fluentbuilder pattern (e.g. withX(...).withY(...)). Together with default values; it provides a fail-fast (with immediate validation feedback after each .withX() and slightly less verbosity compared to builder pattern.

Author: added code blocks

         <p>A user should <strong>not</strong> create this class directly. It should be created by a <a href="#bookmark=id.kafer4mjzh1m">top-level utility method</a>.
      </td>
   </tr>
   <tr>
      <td>
         <p>class IO.ReadAll
      </td>
      <td>
         <p>A few different sources implement runtime configuration for reading from a data source. This is a valuable pattern because it enables a purely batch source to become a more sophisticated streaming source.
         <p>As much as possible, this type of transform should have the type richness of a construction-time-configured transform:
         <ul>

>             <li>Support Beam Row output with a schema known at construction-time

Author: @mosche yes, haha I made a new version (strikeout old) in Google Docs and it was also ported over, cleaned up now!

            <li>Extra configuration may be needed (and acceptable) in this case (e.g. a SchemaProvider parameter, a Schema parameter, a Schema Catalog or a utility of that sort).
            <li>The input PCollection should have a fixed type with a schema, so it can be easily manipulated by users.
            </li>
         </ul>
         <p>Example:
         <p><a href="https://beam.apache.org/releases/javadoc/current/org/apache/beam/sdk/io/jdbc/JdbcIO.ReadAll.html">JdbcIO.ReadAll</a>, <a href="https://beam.apache.org/releases/javadoc/current/org/apache/beam/sdk/io/parquet/ParquetIO.ReadFiles.html">ParquetIO.ReadFiles</a>
      </td>
   </tr>
   <tr>
      <td>
         <p>class IO.Write
      </td>
      <td>

>          <p>Gives access to the class that represents writes within the I/O. The Write class should implement an interface similar to the builder pattern (e.g. withX(...).withY(...)).

Author: changed!

>          <p>A user should not create this class directly. It should be created by a <a href="#bookmark=id.7yk3g4vwt7yn">top-level utility method</a>.

Author: fixed the bookmarks

         <ul>
            <li>Support Beam Row output with a schema known at construction-time
            <li>Extra configuration may be needed (and acceptable) in this case (e.g. a SchemaProvider parameter, a Schema parameter, a Schema Catalog or a utility of that sort).
            <li>The input PCollection should have a fixed type with a schema, so it can be easily manipulated by users.
            </li>
         </ul>
         <p>Example:

>          <p><a href="https://beam.apache.org/releases/javadoc/current/org/apache/beam/sdk/io/jdbc/JdbcIO.ReadAll.html">JdbcIO.ReadAll</a>, <a href="https://beam.apache.org/releases/javadoc/current/org/apache/beam/sdk/io/parquet/ParquetIO.ReadFiles.html">ParquetIO.ReadFiles</a>

Author: good catch, removed!

      <td>
         <p>Some data storage and external systems implement APIs that do not adjust easily to Read or Write semantics (e.g. <a href="https://beam.apache.org/releases/javadoc/current/org/apache/beam/sdk/io/gcp/healthcare/FhirIO.html">FhirIO implements several different transforms</a> that fetch or send data to Fhir).
         <p>These classes should be added <strong>only if it is impossible or prohibitively difficult to encapsulate their functionality as part of extra configuration of Read, Write and ReadAll</strong> transforms, to avoid increasing the cognitive load on users.
         <p>A user should not create these classes directly. They should be created by a <a href="#bookmark=id.7yk3g4vwt7yn">top-level static method</a>.
         <ul>
            <li>Support Beam Row output with a schema known at construction-time
            <li>Extra configuration may be needed (and acceptable) in this case (e.g. a SchemaProvider parameter, a Schema parameter, a Schema Catalog or a utility of that sort).
            <li>The input PCollection should have a fixed type with a schema, so it can be easily manipulated by users.
            </li>
         </ul>
         <p>Example:

>          <p><a href="https://beam.apache.org/releases/javadoc/current/org/apache/beam/sdk/io/jdbc/JdbcIO.ReadAll.html">JdbcIO.ReadAll</a>, <a href="https://beam.apache.org/releases/javadoc/current/org/apache/beam/sdk/io/parquet/ParquetIO.ReadFiles.html">ParquetIO.ReadFiles</a>

Author: good catch, removed!

         <ul>
            <li>IO.Read from(Query query)
            <li>IO.Read from(Table table) / from(String table)
            <li>IO.Read from (Topic topic)
            <li>IO.Read from(Partition partition)
            </li>
         </ul>
         <p>The input type for these methods can reflect the external source’s API (e.g. <a href="https://kafka.apache.org/27/javadoc/?org/apache/kafka/common/TopicPartition.html">Kafka TopicPartition</a> should use a <strong>Beam-implemented</strong> TopicPartition object).
         <p>Sometimes, there may be multiple <strong>from</strong> locations that use the same input type, which means we cannot leverage method overloading. With this in mind, use a new method to enable this situation.
         <ul>
            <li>IO.Read from(String table)
            <li>IO.Read fromQuery(String query)
            </li>
         </ul>
      </td>
   </tr>
   <tr>
      <td>
         <p>IO.Read.fromABC(String abc)
      </td>
      <td>

>          <p><strong>This pattern is discouraged IFF method overloading is impossible.</strong> Refer to <a href="#bookmark=id.2ptx93mbewv2">Read.from(source) guidance</a>.

Author: changed.

      </td>
   </tr>
   <tr>
      <td>
         <p>IO.Write.to(destination)
      </td>
      <td>
         <p>A Write transform must provide a <strong>to</strong> method where users can specify where to write data. If a transform can write to different <em>kinds</em> of sources while still using the same input element type(e.g. tables, queries, topics, partitions), then multiple implementations of this from method can be provided to accommodate this:
         <ul>
            <li>IO.Write to(Query query)
            <li>IO.Write to(Table table) / from(String table)
            <li>IO.Write to(Topic topic)
            <li>IO.Write to(Partition partition)
            </li>
         </ul>

>          <p>The input type for these methods can use an Apache Beam utility that reflects the external source’s API (e.g. <a href="https://kafka.apache.org/27/javadoc/?org/apache/kafka/common/TopicPartition.html">Kafka TopicPartition</a>). Per G5, Apache Beam, or an interface given by Apache Beam should not expose external libraries.

Author: changed.

            <li>IO.Write to(String table)
            <li>IO.Write toTable(String table)
            </li>
         </ul>
      </td>
   </tr>
   <tr>
      <td>
         <p>IO.Write.to(DynamicDestination destination)
      </td>
      <td>
         <p>A write transform may enable writing to more than one destination. This can be a complicated pattern that should be implemented carefully (it is the preferred pattern for connectors that will likely have multiple destinations in a single pipeline).
         <p>The preferred pattern for this is to define a DynamicDestinations interface (e.g. <a href="https://beam.apache.org/releases/javadoc/current/org/apache/beam/sdk/io/gcp/bigquery/DynamicDestinations.html">BigQueryIO.DynamicDestinations</a>) that will allow the user to define all necessary parameters for the configuration of the destination.
         <p>The DynamicDestinations interface also allows maintainers to add new methods over time (with <strong>default implementations</strong> to avoid breaking existing users) that will define extra configuration parameters if necessary.
      </td>
   </tr>
   <tr>
      <td>
         <p>IO.Write.toABC(destination)
      </td>
      <td>

>          <p><strong>This pattern is discouraged IFF method overloading is impossible.</strong> Refer to <a href="#bookmark=id.nwnj8l50zeyq">Write.to(source) guidance</a>.

Author: addressed.

         <p>{{< highlight java >}}
BigQueryIO.write()
   .withWriteConfig(FileLoadsConfig.withAvro()
   .withTriggeringFrequency()...)

BigQueryIO.write()
   .withWriteConfig(StreamingInsertsConfig.withDetailedError()
   .withExactlyOnce().etc..)
            {{< /highlight >}}
      </td>
   </tr>
   <tr>
      <td>
         <p>class IO.Write.withFormatFunction
      </td>
      <td>
         <p><strong>Discouraged - except for dynamic destinations</strong>
         <p>For sources that can receive Beam Row-typed PCollections, the format function should not be necessary, because Beam should be able to format the input data based on its schema.
         <p>For sinks providing Dynamic Destination functionality, elements may carry data that helps determine their destination. These data may need to be removed before writing to their final destination.
         <p>To include this method, a connector should:
         <ul>

>             <li>Show that it’s not possible to perform data matching automatically

Author: added.

>             <li>Support Dynamic Destinations and need changes to the input data due to that reason

Author: added.

            </li>
         </ul>
      </td>
   </tr>
   <tr>
      <td>
         <p>IO.Read.withCoder
         <p>IO.Write.withCoder
      </td>
      <td>
         <p><strong>Strongly Discouraged</strong>
         <p>Sets the coder to use to encode/decode the element type of the output / input PCollection of this connector. In general, it is recommended that sources will:
         <ol>

>             <li>Return Row objects with a schema that is automatically inferred

Author: added.

>             <li>Automatically set the necessary coder by having fixed output/input types, or inferring their output/input types

Author: added.

         <ul>
            <li>Local testing by mocking the destination service
            <li>User-enabled metrics, monitoring, and security handling in the client.
            <li>Integration testing based on emulators
            </li>
         </ul>
         <p>Example:
         <p><a href="https://beam.apache.org/releases/javadoc/current/org/apache/beam/sdk/io/gcp/bigquery/BigQueryIO.Write.html#withTestServices-org.apache.beam.sdk.io.gcp.bigquery.BigQueryServices-">BigQueryIO.Write.withTestServices</a>(<a href="https://beam.apache.org/releases/javadoc/current/org/apache/beam/sdk/io/gcp/bigquery/BigQueryServices.html">BigQueryServices</a>)
      </td>
   </tr>
</table>
</div>

#### Types

<div class="table-container-wrapper">
<table class="table table-bordered table-io-standards">
   <tr>
      <th>
         <p>Java Syntax
      </th>
      <th>
         <p>Semantics
      </th>
   </tr>
   <tr>
      <td>
         <p>Method IO.Read.expand
      </td>
      <td>
         <p>The expand method of a Read transform must return a PCollection object with a type. The type may be parameterized or fixed to a class.

>          <p>A user should <strong>not</strong> create this class directly. It should be created by a <a href="#bookmark=id.kafer4mjzh1m">top-level utility method</a>.

Author: fixed the link

         <p>If the Write transform would not need to return any metadata, a Write.Result object <strong>is still preferable</strong>, because it will allow the transform to evolve its metadata over time.
         <p>Examples of metadata:
         <ul>
            <li>Failed elements and errors
            <li>Successfully written elements
            <li>API tokens from calls issued by the transform
            </li>
         </ul>
         <p>Examples:
         <p>BigQueryIO’s <a href="https://beam.apache.org/releases/javadoc/current/org/apache/beam/sdk/io/gcp/bigquery/WriteResult.html">WriteResult</a>
      </td>
   </tr>
</table>
</div>

#### Evolution

Over time, I/O need to evolve to address new use cases, or use new APIs under the covers. Some examples of necessary evolution of an I/O:

* A new data type needs to be supported within it (e.g. [any-type partitioning in JdbcIO.ReadWithPartitions](https://github.com/apache/beam/pull/15848))

> * A new backend API needs to be supported (e.g.

Author: removed.

      </th>
      <th>
         <p>Semantics
      </th>
   </tr>
   <tr>
      <td>
         <p>function readFromXXX
      </td>
      <td>
         <p>The method to start constructing an I/O.Read transform.
      </td>
   </tr>
   <tr>
      <td>
         <p>function writeToXXX
      </td>
      <td>
         <p>The method to start constructing an I/O.Write transform.
      </td>
   </tr>
</table>
</div>

## Testing

An I/O should have unit tests, integration tests, and performance tests. In the following guidance we explain what each type of test aims to achieve, and provide a _baseline_ standard of test coverage. Do note that the actual test cases and business logic of the actual test would vary depending on specifics of each source/sink but we have included some suggested test cases as a baseline.

This guide complements the [Apache Beam I/O transform testing guide](https://beam.apache.org/documentation/io/testing/) by adding specific test cases and scenarios. For general information regarding testing Beam I/O connectors, please refer to that guide.

<div class="table-container-wrapper">
<table class="table table-bordered table-io-standards">
   <tr>
      <td>

>          <p>The unit/integration/performance tests should live under the package org.apache.beam.sdk.io.{connector}.testing. This will cause the various tests to work with the standard user-facing interfaces of the connector.

Author: changed.

      </td>
   </tr>
   <tr>
      <td>
         <p>Unbounded write then read using Dataflow
      </td>
      <td>
         <p>A pipeline that continuously writes and reads data. Such a pipeline should be canceled to verify the results. This is only for connectors that support unbounded read.
      </td>
      <td>
         <p><a href="https://github.com/apache/beam/blob/95e9de7891593fa73d582cb6ba5ac0333b2675ff/sdks/java/io/kafka/src/test/java/org/apache/beam/sdk/io/kafka/KafkaIOIT.java#L134">KafkaIOIT.testKafkaIOReadsAndWritesCorrectlyInStreaming</a>
      </td>
   </tr>
</table>
</div>

### Performance Tests

**Because the Performance testing framework is still in flux, performance tests can be a follow-up submission after the actual I/O code.**

**The Performance testing framework does not yet support GoLang or Typescript.**

Performance benchmarks are a critical part of best practices for I/Os as they effectively address several areas:

* To evaluate if the cost and performance of a specific I/O or dataflow template meets the customer’s business requirements.

> * To illustrate performance regressions/improvements to I/O or dataflow templates between code changes

Author: added.

> * To help end customers estimate costs, plan capacity to meet their SLOs

Author: added.

#### Dashboard

> Google performs the performance tests routinely for built-in I/Os and publishes them to an externally viewable dashboard for [Java](http://104.154.241.245/d/bnlHKP3Wz/java-io-it-tests-dataflow?orgId=1) and [Python](http://104.154.241.245/d/gP7vMPqZz/python-io-it-tests-dataflow?orgId=1).

Author: updated.

<p><img src="/images/io-standards/io-connector-performance-test-dashboard-screenshot.png" alt="Dataflow performance test dashboard" title="Dataflow performance test dashboard"></img>

#### Guidance

<div class="table-container-wrapper">
<table class="table table-bordered table-io-standards">
   <tr>
      <td>
         <p>Use the same tests for integration and performance tests when possible. Performance tests are usually the same as an integration test but involve a larger volume of data. Testing frameworks (internal and external) provide features to track performance benchmarks related to these tests and provide dashboards/tooling to detect anomalies.
      </td>
   </tr>
   <tr>
      <td>
         <p>Include a <strong>resource scalability</strong> section into your page under <strong> <a href="#built-in-io">Built-in I/O connector guides</a> </strong>documentation<strong> </strong> which will indicate the upper bounds which the IO has integration tests for.
         <p>For example:

>          <p>An indication that kafkaIO has integration tests with <strong>xxxx</strong> topics. The documentation can state if the connector authors believe that the connector can scale beyond the integration test number, however this will make it clear to the user the limits of the tested paths.

Author: changed!

         <p>The documentation should clearly indicate the configuration that was followed for the limits. For example using runner x and configuration option a.
      </td>
   </tr>
   <tr>
      <td>

>          <p>Document the performance / internal metrics that you I/O collects, including what they mean, and how they can be used (some connectors collect and publish performance metrics like latency/bundle size/etc)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
         <p>Document the performance / internal metrics that your I/O collects including what they mean, and how they can be used (some connectors collect and publish performance metrics like latency/bundle size/etc)
```

Author: updated.

   <tr>
      <td>
         <p>Provided code docs for the relevant language of the I/O. This should also have links to any external sources of information within the Apache Beam site or external documentation location. 
         <p>Examples:
         <ul>
            <li><a href="https://beam.apache.org/releases/javadoc/current/overview-summary.html">Java doc</a>
            <li><a href="https://beam.apache.org/releases/pydoc/current/">Python doc</a>
            <li><a href="https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/apache/beam/sdks/v2/go/pkg/beam">Go doc</a>
         </ul>
      </td>
   </tr>
   <tr>
      <td>
         <p>Add a new page under <strong>I/O connector guides</strong> that covers specific tips and configurations. The following shows those for <a href="https://beam.apache.org/documentation/io/built-in/parquet/">Parquet</a>, <a href="https://beam.apache.org/documentation/io/built-in/hadoop/">Hadoop</a> and others.
         <p>Examples:
         <p><img src="/images/io-standards/io-connector-guides-screenshot.png" width="" alt="I/O connector guides screenshot" title="I/O connector guides screenshot"></img>
      </td>
   </tr>
   <tr>
      <td>

>          <p>Formatting of the section headers in your Javadoc/Pythondoc<strong> </strong>should be consistent throughout such that programmatic information extraction for other pages can be enabled in the future.

Reviewer 2: Leftover? `<strong> </strong>`

>          <p>Formatting of the section headers in your Javadoc/Pythondoc<strong> </strong>should be consistent throughout such that programmatic information extraction for other pages can be enabled in the future.

Author: Removed

>          <p>In the future we may want to use the documents as a source of information for programmatic information extraction for other pages. The position and naming of headers should be consistent to allow this to be enabled in the future. (Take Resource Scalability contents and transfer it to Java/Python docs).

Author: Removed second sentence.

         <p>Example <strong>subset</strong> of sections to include in your page in order:
         <ol>
            <li>Before you start
            <li>{Connector}IO basics
            <li>Supported Features
               <ol>
                  <li>Relational
                  </li>
               </ol>
            <li>Authentication
            <li>Reading from {Connector}
            <li>Writing to {Connector}
            <li><a href="#unit-tests">Resource scalability</a>
            <li>Limitations
            <li>Report and Issue
            </li>
         </ol>
         <p>Example:

>          <p>The KafkaIO <a href="https://beam.apache.org/releases/javadoc/2.1.0/org/apache/beam/sdk/io/kafka/KafkaIO.html">output JavaDoc</a>

Author: Removed output.

      </td>
   </tr>
   <tr>
      <td>

>          <p>I/O Connectors should include a note indicating the Relational Features supported in their page under <strong>I/O connector guides</strong>.

Author: Added a link to the BEAM summit on the same topic.

>          <p>Relational Features are efficiency concepts that can be implemented by an I/O Connector. Using end user supplied pipeline configuration (SchemaIO) and user query (FieldAccessDescriptor) data, apply relational theory to derive improvements. Results in faster pipeline execution, lower operation cost, less data read/written.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
         <p>Relational Features are concepts that can help improve efficiency and can optionally be implemented by an I/O Connector. Using end user supplied pipeline configuration (SchemaIO) and user query (FieldAccessDescriptor) data, relational theory is applied to derive improvements such as faster pipeline execution, lower operational costs and less data read/written.
```
It would be good to link both SchemaIO and FieldAccessDescriptor for further details - if only linking the Javadocs.

Reviewer 2: @hermanmak With all due respect, that's not how you deal with reviews. If you consider this resolved I'd appreciate an explanation at least. Imho this is just a bunch of sentence fragments, but nothing ready for public consumption on the website.

Author: Apologies Mortiz, it was not my intention to overlook your comments. Let me re-evaluate.

Reviewer 2: Thanks for that and sorry for the misunderstanding 👍

         <p>Example table:
         <p><img src="/images/io-standards/io-supported-relational-features-table.png" width="" alt="Supported Relational Features" title="Supported Relational Features"></img>
         <p>Example implementations:

>          <p>BigQueryIO <a href="https://github.com/apache/beam/blob/5bb13fa35b9bc36764895c57f23d3890f0f1b567/sdks/java/io/google-cloud-platform/src/main/java/org/apache/beam/sdk/io/gcp/bigquery/BigQueryIO.java#L1813">Column Pruning</a> via ProjectionPushdown, return only necessary columns indicated by end user query. Achieved using BigQuery DirectRead API;

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
         <p>BigQueryIO <a href="https://github.com/apache/beam/blob/5bb13fa35b9bc36764895c57f23d3890f0f1b567/sdks/java/io/google-cloud-platform/src/main/java/org/apache/beam/sdk/io/gcp/bigquery/BigQueryIO.java#L1813">Column Pruning</a> via ProjectionPushdown to return only necessary columns indicated by end user query. This is achieved by using BigQuery DirectRead API.
```

         <p>Example:
         <p><a href="https://beam.apache.org/documentation/io/connectors/#built-in-io-connectors">https://beam.apache.org/documentation/io/connectors/#built-in-io-connectors</a>
         <p><img src="/images/io-standards/io-supported-via-screenshot.png" width="" alt="alt_text" title="image_tooltip">
      </td>
   </tr>
   <tr>
      <td>
         <p>Provide setup steps to use the I/O, under a <strong>Before you start Header</strong>
         <p>Example:
         <p><a href="https://beam.apache.org/documentation/io/built-in/parquet/#before-you-start">https://beam.apache.org/documentation/io/built-in/parquet/#before-you-start</a>
      </td>
   </tr>
   <tr>
      <td>
         <p>Include a canonical read/write code snippet after the initial description for each supported language. The below example shows Hadoop with examples for Java.
         <p>Example:
         <p><a href="https://beam.apache.org/documentation/io/built-in/hadoop/#reading-using-hadoopformatio">https://beam.apache.org/documentation/io/built-in/hadoop/#reading-using-hadoopformation</a>
      </td>
   </tr>
   <tr>
      <td>

>          <p>Indicate how timestamps for elements are assigned, this includes batch sources, to allow for future I/O which may provide more useful information that current_time()

Reviewer 2: Not sure what this sentence is meant to say ...
```suggestion
         <p>Indicate how timestamps for elements are assigned. This includes batch sources to allow for future I/Os which may provide more useful information than current_time().
```

Author: Thanks for the catch.

         <p>Example:
      </td>
   </tr>
   <tr>
      <td>
         <p>Indicate how timestamps are advanced; for Batch sources this will be marked as n/a in most cases.
      </td>
   </tr>

>    <tr>

Reviewer 2: Duplicate lines, pls remove
https://github.com/apache/beam/pull/24962/files#diff-9b99a2b95afbed4175959e9326e708e4f73adc963d2ebfb491a021644c2ee148R133-R145

Author: Removed duplicates!

         <p>Example:
         <p>BigQuery batch loads first create a temp GCS location <a href="https://github.com/apache/beam/blob/master/sdks/java/io/google-cloud-platform/src/main/java/org/apache/beam/sdk/io/gcp/bigquery/BigQueryIO.java#L455">https://github.com/apache/beam/blob/master/sdks/java/io/google-cloud-platform/src/main/java/org/apache/beam/sdk/io/gcp/bigquery/BigQueryIO.java#L455</a>
      </td>
   </tr>
   <tr>
      <td>
         <p>Indicate how timestamps are advanced; for Batch sources this will be marked as n/a in most cases.
         <p>Example:
      </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
      <td>
         <p>Outline any temporary resources (for example, files) that the connector will create.
         <p>Example:
         <p>BigQuery batch loads first create a temp GCS location
         <p><a href="https://github.com/apache/beam/blob/master/sdks/java/io/google-cloud-platform/src/main/java/org/apache/beam/sdk/io/gcp/bigquery/BigQueryIO.java#L455">https://github.com/apache/beam/blob/master/sdks/java/io/google-cloud-platform/src/main/java/org/apache/beam/sdk/io/gcp/bigquery/BigQueryIO.java#L455</a>
      </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
      <td>

>          <p>Provide, in an <strong>Authentication Subheader</strong>, how to acquire partner authorization material to securely access the source/sink.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
         <p>Provide, under an <strong>Authentication</strong> subheader, how to acquire partner authorization material to securely access the source/sink.
```

Author: changed.

         <p>Example:
         <p><a href="https://beam.apache.org/documentation/io/built-in/snowflake/#authentication">https://beam.apache.org/documentation/io/built-in/snowflake/#authentication</a>
         <p>Here BigQuery names it permissions but the topic covers similarities
         <p><a href="https://beam.apache.org/releases/javadoc/2.1.0/org/apache/beam/sdk/io/gcp/bigquery/BigQueryIO.html">https://beam.apache.org/releases/javadoc/2.1.0/org/apache/beam/sdk/io/gcp/bigquery/BigQueryIO.html</a>
      </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
      <td>
         <p>I/Os should provide links to the Source/Sink documentation within <strong>Before you start Header</strong>
         <p>Example:
         <p><a href="https://beam.apache.org/documentation/io/built-in/snowflake/">https://beam.apache.org/documentation/io/built-in/snowflake/</a>
      </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
      <td>

>          <p>Indicate if there is (native | X-language | Not Available) support in each language with a link to the docs. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
         <p>Indicate if there is native or X-language support in each language with a link to the docs. 
```

Author: changed.

         <p>Example:
         <p>Kinesis I/O has a native implementation of java and X-language support for python but no support for Golang.
      </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td>

>       <p>Indicate known limitations under a <strong>Limitations Header</strong>. If the limitation has a tracking issue, please link it inline.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      <p>Indicate known limitations under a <strong>Limitations</strong> header. If the limitation has a tracking issue, please link it inline.
```

Author: moved header out of the bold.
